Now that we have some sense about how MOSFETs
function, let's use them to build circuits
to process our digitally encoded information.
We have two simple rules we'll use when building
the circuits, which, if they're followed,
will allow us to abstract the behavior of
the MOSFET as a simple voltage-controlled
switch.
The first rule is that we'll only use n-channel
MOSFETs, which we'll call NFETs for short,
when building pulldown circuits that connect
a signaling node to the GROUND rail of the
power supply.
When the pulldown circuit is conducting, the
signaling node will be at 0V and qualify as
the digital value "0".
If we obey this rule, NFETs will act switches
controlled by V_GS, the difference between
the voltage of the gate terminal and the voltage
of the source terminal.
When V_GS is lower than the MOSFET's threshold
voltage, the switch is "open" or not conducting
and there is no connection between the MOSFET's
source and drain terminals.
If V_GS is greater than the threshold voltage,
the switch is "on" or conducting and there
is a connection between the source and drain
terminals.
That path has a resistance determined by the
magnitude of V_GS.
The larger V_GS, the lower the effective resistance
of the switch and the more current that will
flow from drain to source.
When designing pulldown circuits of NFET switches,
we can use the following simple mental model
for each NFET switch:
if the gate voltage is a digital 0, the switch
will be off; if the gate voltage is a digital
1, the switch will be on.
The situation with PFET switches is analogous,
except that the potentials are reversed.
Our rule is that PFETs can only be used in
pullup circuits, used to connect a signaling
node to the power supply voltage, which we'll
call V_DD.
When the pullup circuit is conducting, the
signaling node will be at V_DD volts and qualify
as the digital value "1".
PFETs have a negative threshold voltage and
V_GS has to be less than the threshold voltage
in order for the PFET switch to be conducting.
All these negatives can be a bit confusing,
but, happily there's a simple mental model
we can use for each PFET switch in the pullup
circuit:
if the gate voltage is a digital 0, the switch
will be on; if the gate voltage is a digital
1, the switch will be off - basically the
opposite behavior of the NFET switch.
You may be wondering why we can't use NFETs
in pullup circuits or PFETs in pulldown circuits.
You'll get to explore the answer to this question
in the first lab of Assignment 2.
Meanwhile, the short answer is that the signaling
node will experience degraded signaling levels
and we'll loose the noise margins we've worked
so hard to create!
Now consider the CMOS implementation of a
combinational inverter.
If the inverter's input is a digital 0, its
output is a digital 1, and vice versa.
The inverter circuit consists of a single
NFET switch for the pulldown circuit, connecting
the output node to GROUND and a single PFET
switch for the pullup circuit, connecting
the output to V_DD.
The gate terminals of both switches are connected
to the inverter's input node.
The inverter's voltage transfer characteristic
is shown in the figure.
When V_IN is a digital 0 input, we see that
V_OUT is greater than or equal to V_OH, representing
a digital 1 output.
Let's look at the state of the pullup and
pulldown switches when the input is a digital
0.
Recalling the simple mental model for the
NFET and PFET switches, a 0-input means the
NFET switch is off, so there's no connection
between the output node and ground, and the
PFET switch is on, making a connection between
the output node and V_DD.
Current will flow through the pullup switch,
charging the output node until its voltage
reaches V_DD.
Once both the source and drain terminals are
at V_DD, there's no voltage difference across
the switch and hence no more current will
flow through the switch.
Similarly, when V_IN is a digital 1, the NFET
switch is on and PFET switch is off, so the
output is connected to ground and eventually
reaches a voltage of 0V.
Again, current flow through pulldown switch
will cease once the output node reaches 0V.
When the input voltage is in the middle of
its range, it's possible, depending on the
particular power supply voltage used and the
threshold voltage of the MOSFETs, that both
the pullup and pulldown circuits will be conducting
for a short period of time.
That's okay.
In fact, with both MOSFET switches on, small
changes in the input voltage will produce
large changes in the output voltage, leading
to the very high gain exhibited by CMOS devices.
This in turn will mean we can pick signaling
thresholds that incorporate generous noise
margins, allowing CMOS devices to work reliably
in many different operating environments.
This is our first CMOS combinational logic
gate.
In the next video, we'll explore how to build
other, more interesting logic functions.